---
layout: post
title: "Some guy naively bungles through his first steps in Elixir"
permalink: /naive-elixir
author_profile: true
read_time: true
comments: true
share: true
related: true
description: "A solution to the Advent of Code 2021 day one coding challenge using Elixir! I'm writing code in this language for the first time ever, what could go wrong?"
prism-centering: true
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/public/css/elixir/prism.css">

<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-1">
<p>
I've got a quest to embark on: I'm going to learn <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/">Elixir</a> programming language.
</p>

<p>
Well, kind of.
</p>

<p>
Elixir is a language I've never used per se. I've never written a program in Elixir, either professionally or otherwise. HOWEVER, I'm fairly familiar with a number of the concepts that undergird Elixir: concurrency, multi-dispatch functions, macros and metaprogramming, pure functional programming, and function composition. 
</p>

<p>
So, I don't KNOW Elixir, but I've been exposed to many of its core ideas.
</p>

<p>
However, conceptually knowing how a thing works and having "boots on the ground" experience working with it are two very different things. There's nothing better for learning than doing, so we're gonna take a look at the <a href="https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/1">first Advent of Code 2021 problem</a> and try to solve it in Elixir!
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org3fd56e3" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org3fd56e3">A note on this blog</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-1">
<p>
This document, with a few editorial sleights of hand for clarity and readability, is my honest-to-god first attempt at doing anything in Elixir. No joke, I had never written a line of Elixir code before writing this, and I've barely read any either.
</p>

<p>
I've shaved off a few warts here and there, but by and large what follows is exactly the path I walked in order to solve problems, learn the language, and derive an answer for the coding challenge.
</p>

<p>
If you're a member of the Elixir community, or a fellow first-time language learner, or just curious, you may find this journey interesting! 
</p>

<p>
So, that being said, let's get into it:
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org16cf9e5" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org16cf9e5">Step one, read the challenge inputs</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-2">
<p>
All of the Advent of Code challenges have an accompanying plain text file to go along with the challenge, which I've usually downloaded onto my machine and processed from there.
</p>

<p>
So, let's read that file into memory! After a quick perusal of <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/">the docs</a>, it looks, self-evidently enough, like File.read is what we want:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{ :ok, contents } = File.read "~/Desktop/inputs.txt"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: {:error, :enoent}</code></pre>

<p>
That &#x2026; uh, did not go as expected. The file path is right, this is definitely the right function, so why is it telling me the file isn't there? 
</p>

<p>
I think &#x2026; I think I've been here before.
</p>

<p>
Yes. This is the point on the Wheel of Software Development where you attempt and instantly fail at something so trivially simple that you start to question your entire career path and future in the industry.
</p>

<p>
Alright. Breathe my dude. You've read a file from disk in plenty of other languages before, you can do it in this one too. We just need to dig a little bit to find out what's going on here.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org89b8ec7" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org89b8ec7">Unexpected deviation one: absolute file paths</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-3">
<p>
After some research, it turns out that Elixir will expect a path to be a relative path unless you tell it that it's an absolute path. Just some tribal knowledge that you have to pick up along the way I suppose.
</p>

<p>
I've never understood why file paths are always such a hairy topic in programming languages. <a href="https://nodejs.org/api/path.html">Node.js has a whole module dedicated to paths.</a> In Clojure and Java, you must contend with the dreaded <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2396493/what-is-a-classpath-and-how-do-i-set-it">classpath</a>. Everybody has their own special sauce for specifying where your files are and how to get to them. Looks like Elixir favors the assumption that the paths you feed to it are relative unless explicitly stated otherwise.
</p>

<p>
I think the "why" of this issue is that the seemingly simple problem of file paths is more complicated that I'm giving it credit, but at any rate, the <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Path.html#expand/1">Path.expand</a> function seems to be what we need for the task:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{:ok, contents} = File.read Path.expand "~/Desktop/inputs.txt"</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{:ok,
"195\n197\n201\n204\n203\n216\n213\n215\n216\n185\n188\n190\n205\n218\n237\n243\n248\n278\n289\n292\n304\n313\n313 ..."}</code></pre>


<p>
Alright, that did it. We can proceed onwards.
</p>

<p>
But wait a minute. If we look more closely, a fruitful-seeming sidequest popped up in the course of performing that "simple" task: what was that business about right hand side values and matches?
</p>

<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: {:error, :enoent}</code></pre>

<p>
If a youth squandered on JRPGs taught me anything, it's this: <b>always follow the sidequests</b>. Let's head to that cave the guy at the tavern told us about and see what kinds of dragons there are to slay within.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orged69e0e" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orged69e0e">Sidequest one: pattern matching, assignment and equality</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-4">
</div>
<div id="outline-container-orgc4df2f8" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="orgc4df2f8">Pattern matching on basic values</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-1-4-1">
<p>
"Pattern matching" is a term you frequently hear in functional programming circles. Cool languages like Prolog, OCaml, Rust and Haskell all have it. But what is it exactly?
</p>

<p>
Evidently, the first thing to learn about pattern matching comes down to the nature of the "=" operator in Elixir. In, well, practically any other language, = is an <em>assignment</em> operator, meaning that we use it to tie a value to a symbol for later use.
</p>

<p>
Not so in Elixir. It is not <em>just</em> for assignment, it is also for <em>matching</em>. It seems to be more akin to the good old = we remember and love from math class. Consider this:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">x = 1

if 1 = x do IO.puts "That makes sense ... but it looks weird" end</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">That makes sense ... but it looks weird
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
Any other language would have assumed that you just tried to assign "x" to the number 1, which, needless to say, will produce an error. Permitting a programmer to overload a concept like "1 equals 1" or "1 is a number" with something like "1 is an eggplant emoji" is not conducive to a sane and well-ordered understanding of your computer. Or the universe at large for that matter.
</p>

<p>
But because we assigned 1 to the variable "x" before, it stands to reason that 1 = x too, strange though it appears through my C-tinted glasses.
</p>

<p>
If we tried that without first having assigned x to 1, we'd get a similar error to the one we saw before: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">x = 2
1 = x</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: 2</code></pre>

<p>
So "=" pulls double duty in this language. It assigns variables, but it also checks whether values match, and in the case of a mistake, informs you which value on which side of the operator isn't correct.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgad0fd6c" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="orgad0fd6c">Pattern matching on structured data</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-1-4-2">
<p>
This part is a little less weird if you've worked with <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment">ES6 destructuring assignment</a>: you can also pattern match on a structured data type. It works like this (with some bonus <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/basic-types.html#strings">string interpolation</a> thrown in):
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{one, two, three, four} = {:my, "mother", :is, "a fish"}
IO.puts "#{one} #{two} #{three} #{four}"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">my mother is a fish
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
But while THIS works in ES6: 
</p>

<pre class="highlight language-js" tabindex="0"><code class="language-js">const { a, b } = {a: "my", b: "mother is", c: "a fish"}
console.log(`${a} ${b}`)</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-js" tabindex="0"><code class="language-js">my mother is
undefined</code></pre>

<p>
THIS does not work in Elixir: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{one, two} = {:my, "mother", :is, "a fish"}
IO.puts "#{one} #{two}"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: {:my, "mother", :is, "a fish"} </code></pre>

<p>
Each side of the operator must match in quantity and in type: no partial destructuring, and no destructuring of a list into another data structure like a tuple.
</p>

<p>
If you want to ignore anything, you need to leave a "_" in the place of the thing you're ignoring.
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{one, two, three, _} = {:my, "mother", :is, "a fish"}
IO.puts "#{one} #{two} #{three}"</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">my mother is
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
This makes Elixir a more explicit language than I'm used to. I've dabbled in <a href="https://mostly-adequate.gitbook.io/mostly-adequate-guide/ch05#pointfree">point-free style</a> in <a href="https://ramdajs.com/">Ramda.js</a>, which permits (and even encourages!) you to dispense with naming the arguments to your functions in the pursuit of making them more generic and universally applicable to your data. Clojure enables this via the <a href="https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/partial">partial function</a>, and point-free style is a <a href="https://wiki.haskell.org/Pointfree">defining feature</a> of Haskell.
</p>

<p>
To be fair, Elixir also permits point-free style via the <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/enumerables-and-streams.html#the-pipe-operator">pipe operator</a>: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">"hello" |> String.capitalize |> String.reverse</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">"olleH"</code></pre>

<p>
I guess the language is seeking to strike a balance between "you have to name everything" and "there's a bunch of stuff you don't have to name if you don't want to". You're granted the freedom to pass a "known" piece of data through a pipe without hanging an identifier on it at every stage. However, if you try to grab a subset of data out of a data structure and that structure contains something unexpected, Elixir will complain about it.
</p>

<p>
Which brings us back to the branching off point of our sidequest: the reason I got a MatchError when I tried to read my file was because I didn't include anything about the error on the left-hand side of the pattern.
</p>

<p>
So how do you go about the task of reading a file and handling errors if the file isn't there or the path is incorrect?
</p>

<p>
The Javascript-y/lisp-y part of my brain is telling me to grab the contents of the file, and also grab the error, and check whether one of them is null before proceeding:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">{:ok, contents, :error, reason} = File.read "~/Desktop/inputs.txt"

if :error do IO.puts "no file at that path" end
if :ok do IO.puts "here's your file!" end</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: {:error, :enoent}</code></pre>

<p>
But that's not right either. All we got back from File.read in THAT example was {:error, :enoent}. Even though we included pattern information about the error on the left-hand side, we ALSO included a pattern for {:ok, contents}. The right hand side only had {:error, :enoent}, and the disjunction between right and left produced a match error.
</p>

<p>
You could do a try/catch-style thing, or as it's know in Elixir, try/rescue, which <em>will</em> let you attempt a side effect-producing IO operation without crashing the process: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">try do
  {:ok, contents} = File.read("~/Desktop/inputs.txt")

  IO.puts "here's your file! #{contents}"
rescue 
  error -> IO.inspect error
end</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">%MatchError{term: {:error, :enoent}}</code></pre>

<p>
But, evidently, <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/try-catch-and-rescue.html#errors">this is not the Elixir way</a>. Instead, one is encouraged to use strategies based on pattern-matching rather than try/catch.
</p>

<p>
The <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/case-cond-and-if.html#case">case statement</a> will allow you to pattern match against the return value of a function and perform an operation based on what it matches against:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">file_or_error = case File.read "~/Desktop/inputs.txt" do
		  {:error, reason} -> reason
		  {:ok, contents} -> contents 
		end

IO.puts "If you see 'enoent', it means there wasn't a file there: #{file_or_error}"</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">If you see 'enoent', it means there wasn't a file there: enoent
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
And thus we come to the end of the sidequest, dragon slain, and with the Amulet of Pattern-Matching and Shield of Error Handling now tucked away into our inventory. I'm sure they will make the rest of the main quest much easier!
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org4d62bad" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org4d62bad">Back to the main quest: process the data</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-5">
<p>
Getting back to the task of solving the challenge, we should start massaging this huge newline-delimited string into something easier to work with. 
</p>

<p>
It's an iterative task that we're performing, so an iterable data type like a list seems appropriate. We're going to be doing math on this list eventually, so let's cast the resultant list of strings to a list of numbers while we're at it:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">file_or_error = case File.read Path.expand "~/Desktop/inputs.txt" do
		  {:error, reason} -> reason
		  {:ok, contents} -> contents 
		end

list = if file_or_error !== "enoent" do
  file_or_error
  |> String.split(["\n"])
  |> Enum.map(&String.to_integer/1)
end

IO.inspect list</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (ArgumentError) errors were found at the given arguments:

  * 1st argument: not a textual representation of an integer

    :erlang.binary_to_integer("")
    (elixir 1.13.4) lib/enum.ex:1593: Enum."-map/2-lists^map/1-0-"/2</code></pre>

<p>
Woof. Back at the nadir of the Wheel so soon? That came quick!
</p>

<p>
Breathe my dude. Chill. Read the error message and proceed.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orga5c5c20" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orga5c5c20">Side quest two: more error messages</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-6">
<p>
When I managed to stop researching master's degrees and actually read the error message, it told me some very cool things, and incidentally revealed some more interesting details about how Elixir works.
</p>

<p>
The top of the error, in somewhat academic terms, told us exactly what went wrong:
</p>

<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (ArgumentError) errors were found at the given arguments:

  * 1st argument: not a textual representation of an integer</code></pre>

<p>
And then it showed us two more things: the function call that caused the error, and a little peek at the underlying engine that powers Elixir.
</p>

<p>
Elixir, in reality, is <a href="https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/">Ruby</a>-inspired <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_sugar">syntactic sugar</a> over the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erlang_(programming_language)">Erlang</a> language. It's more like the powdered sugar on a donut than the inch-thick schmear of frosting on your niece's birthday cake though, notice this line: 
</p>

<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">:erlang.binary_to_integer("")</code></pre>

<p>
That must be the actual Erlang function that Elixir attempted to run against your data, and the value that was passed to that function. Neat! 
</p>

<p>
And finally, it told us where to go looking within the Elixir source code itself if we really need to go digging for an answer. This part is more interesting than it is useful, but if you encounter an especially weird and hairy bug, information like this is gold for debugging:
</p>

<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">(elixir 1.13.4) lib/enum.ex:1593: Enum."-map/2-lists^map/1-0-"/2</code></pre>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgae3f461" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgae3f461">Trimming the non-textual representations of integers from the data</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-7">
<p>
Evidently, somewhere in the data there is an empty string. Probably at the beginning or the end, because String.trim fixes the issue nicely: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir"> file_or_error = case File.read Path.expand "~/Desktop/inputs.txt" do
		   {:error, reason} -> reason
		   {:ok, contents} -> contents 
		 end
 list = if file_or_error !== "enoent" do
   file_or_error
   |> String.trim
   |> String.split(["\n"])
   |> Enum.map(&String.to_integer/1)
 end

IO.inspect list</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">[195, 197, 201, 204, 203, 216, 213, 215, 216, 185, 188, 190, 205, 218, 237, 243, 
 248, 278, 289, 292, 304, 313, 314, 317, 329, 328, 329, 328, 329, 330, 331, 329, 
 333, 337, 338, 345, 352, 354, 355, 359, 360, 363, 365, 364, 370, 371, 367, 387, 
 403, 407, ...]</code></pre>

<p>
Here we are at last, a list of integers! Time for some good old list comprehension.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org62c7ee1" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org62c7ee1">Examining the processed data</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-8">
<p>
Like any sane language, there are a thousand ways to iterate through a list. Traipsing through the aisles of the language docs, we find a <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Kernel.SpecialForms.html#for/1">garden-variety for-loop</a>, <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Enum.html#each/2">Enum.each</a>, <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Enum.html#map/2">Enum.map</a>, so on and so forth. 
</p>

<p>
Elixir seems to <a href="https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/recursion.html#loops-through-recursion">favor recursion</a> by way of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_dispatch">multiple dispatch</a> for performing an iterative task. But, to be totally frank with you, I've never grokked how to wield multiple dispatch idiomatically, I don't naturally reach for recursion in most cases, and the novelty of all of this is starting to wear me thin. Maybe we'll try that another day.
</p>

<p>
For now, I'm gonna whip out the bestest functional list-mangling Swiss Army knife that there ever was: the almighty <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Enum.html#reduce/3">REDUCE</a>. 
</p>

<p>
Let's make a small demo to grok this more easily. In a reducer, you get access to a couple of things:
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>each item in the list, and</li>
<li>an "accumulator" which holds the value you're building up.</li>
</ul>

<p>
I'll need to simulate both of those for this smaller pre-reducer demo:
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>"x" in this instance will be a hypothetical item in the list; specifically, the first item in this demo.</li>
<li>"num_inc" will be the accumulator, or the number of times depth increases to put it in the parlance of the challenge.</li>
</ul>

<p>
I'll also need some way to reference the whole list in order to compare depth readings, or in other words: I'll need access to both the <b>current element</b> in the list and its <b>neighbor to the right</b>.
</p>

<p>
How do we get access to the neighbor element?
</p>

<p>
In some languages, the reduce function will <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/reduce#syntax">give you access to the list being traversed</a> within the reducer callback itself. Other languages have functional list iterators which <a href="https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/map-indexed">provide both the item being iterated on and its index in the original list</a>, which can be used for index-based access on the list.
</p>

<p>
Neither of these kinds of functions are available in the Elixir standard library. Accessing a list by its index <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/32837195/how-to-get-list-elients-by-index-in-elixir">is considered unidiomatic</a>.
</p>

<p>
Guess what they encourage you to do instead?
</p>

<p>
Yep, pattern match.
</p>

<p>
I'm brewing a strategy in my head whereby we let the reference list ride shotgun inside the accumulator itself, and pop items off of the front as the reducer loops, but for the purposes of this limited test exercise:
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>"next" will represent the next item in the list from "x". We'll compare x to next to see if the depth increased, and increment num_inc accordingly.</li>
</ul>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [231, 235, 220, 222]
[x | _] = list 
[_, next | tail] = list

num_inc = 0 + if x < next do
  IO.puts "depth has increased, add one to num_inc captain"
  1
else
  IO.puts "depth has not increased or stayed the same, hold your course"
  0
end

IO.puts "num_inc is now #{num_inc}"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">depth has increased, add one to num_inc captain
num_inc is now 1
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
Looks good! 231 is indeed less than 235, so everything appears to work in the small.
</p>

<p>
Let's get it working in the large.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgc000fa4" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgc000fa4">Hooking up the demo logic to the reducer</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-9">
<p>
All we need to do now is hook this up to our reduce function and massage the demo code into a reducey API.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>"ref" is the reference list riding shotgun in the accumulator,</li>
<li>"num_inc" is the number of increments we've observed,</li>
<li>That thing with a percent in front of it is a <a href="https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Map.html">map</a>, and finally,</li>
<li>[next] ++ tail is <a href="https://elixir-recipes.github.io/lists/list-concatenation/">list concatenation</a>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
After we're done, the number of increases should be 2, one between 231 and 235, and a second between 220 and 222:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [231, 235, 220, 222]

Enum.reduce(list,
  %{num_inc: 0, ref: list},
  fn x, acc ->
    [_, next | tail] = acc.ref
    next_inc = if(x < next, do: acc.num_inc + 1, else: acc.num_inc + 0) 
    next_ref = [next] ++ tail

    %{num_inc: next_inc, ref: next_ref }
  end)</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: [222]
    (stdlib 3.17.1) erl_eval.erl:450: :erl_eval.expr/5
    (stdlib 3.17.1) erl_eval.erl:123: :erl_eval.exprs/5
    (elixir 1.13.4) lib/enum.ex:2396: Enum."-reduce/3-lists^foldl/2-0-"/3</code></pre>

<p>
Ah MatchError, we're becoming fast friends. Looks like there was a hidden door in that first sidequest dungeon that I didn't find the first time. 
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgba621b7" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgba621b7">Back to the sidequest dungeon, in search of the Talisman of Advanced Pattern Matching</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-10">
<p>
I'm not quite sure where I went wrong. To discover what's wrong with my pattern, let's do some experiments by "simulating" each run through the reducer.
</p>

<p>
Does the pattern I wrote work for the whole list?
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [231, 235, 220, 222]
[_, next | tail] = list 

IO.inspect next
IO.inspect tail</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">235
[220, 222]</code></pre>

<p>
Yes. Good news, I'm not crazy yet. The first run through the reducer must be ok.
</p>

<p>
How about with the first number removed?
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [235, 220, 222]
[_, next | tail] = list 

IO.inspect next
IO.inspect tail</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">220
[222]</code></pre>

<p>
Yep, still works, but I'm starting to see what I did wrong the first time. How about we fast-forward to verify my sneaking suspicion:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [222]
[_, next | tail] = list 

IO.inspect next
IO.inspect tail</code></pre>
<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: [222]</code></pre>

<p>
There it is. It's plain to see when you just write out the steps by hand, isn't it?
</p>

<p>
I didn't account for a scenario in my original reducer: what happens when there's only one value left? You can't match against three elements in a list when there's only one thing in there, hence the MatchError.
</p>

<p>
And now to rewrite that pattern to account for this scenario. This should work for the full reference list, a list with one elements, and an empty list.
</p>

<p>
The full reference list:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [231, 235, 220, 222]

[next, tail] = case list do
     [_, second | rest] -> [second, [second] ++ rest]
     [last] -> [last, []] 
     [] -> [0, []]
  end</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">[235, [235, 220, 222]]</code></pre>

<p>
A partial list:
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [220, 222]

[next, tail] = case list do
     [_, second | rest] -> [second, [second] ++ rest]
     [last] -> [last, []] 
     [] -> [0, []]
  end</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">[222, [222]]</code></pre>

<p>
AND a list with just one item: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [222]

[next, tail] = case list do
     [_, second | rest] -> [second, [second] ++ rest]
     [last] -> [last, []] 
     [] -> [0, []]
  end</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">[222, []]</code></pre>

<p>
Talisman in hand! Let's hook this puppy up to the real thing.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org83bac31" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org83bac31">Finally, problem solved</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-11">
<p>
Let's refactor that last attempt and see what happens: 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">list = [231, 235, 220, 222]

result = Enum.reduce(list,
  %{num_inc: 0, ref: list},
  fn x, acc ->
    [next, tail] = case acc.ref do
		     [_, second | rest] -> [second, rest]
		     [last] -> [last, []] 
		     [] -> [0, []]
		   end
    next_inc = if(x < next, do: acc.num_inc + 1, else: acc.num_inc + 0) 
    next_ref = [next] ++ tail

    %{num_inc: next_inc, ref: next_ref}
  end)

IO.puts "The depth readings increased #{result.num_inc} times!"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">The depth readings increased 2 times!
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
HOT DAMN! I think we've got it!
</p>

<p>
From top to bottom, the whole solution looks like this. And it works! 
</p>

<p>
<em>CODE:</em> 
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">file_or_error = case File.read Path.expand "~/Desktop/inputs.txt" do
		  {:error, reason} -> reason
		  {:ok, contents} -> contents 
		end

list = if file_or_error !== "enoent" do
  file_or_error
  |> String.trim
  |> String.split(["\n"])
  |> Enum.map(&String.to_integer/1)
end


result = Enum.reduce(list,
  %{num_inc: 0, ref: list},
  fn x, acc ->
    [next, tail] = case acc.ref do
		     [_, second | rest] -> [second, rest]
		     [last] -> [last, []] 
		     [] -> [0, []]
		   end
    next_inc = if(x < next, do: acc.num_inc + 1, else: acc.num_inc + 0) 
    next_ref = [next] ++ tail

    %{num_inc: next_inc, ref: next_ref}
  end)

IO.puts "The depth readings increased #{result.num_inc} times!"</code></pre>

<p>
<em>RESULT:</em>
</p>
<pre class="highlight language-elixir" tabindex="0"><code class="language-elixir">The depth readings increased 1624 times!
:ok</code></pre>

<p>
Whew. I'm spent. But feeling good now that I've finally gotten this thing to cooperate, no MatchErrors or anything. I think we've come to the end of the quest for the time being.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orge4ff2d4" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orge4ff2d4">Conclusion, learnings</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-12">
<p>
So, what did I learn through this process?
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Elixir really, REALLY wants you to account for every contingency when it comes to assigning variables. Does this thing exist at all? Is it in the shape you expected it to be? If not, we're gonna crash the whole party until you get every single part of this correct.</li>
<li>This can be annoying in some respects. Other languages I know play fast and loose with this kind of stuff. But once you get the concept under your belt, MatchErrors are pretty helpful when you've gotten something wrong. A far cry from what you get from Javascript in such instances, which can be roughly summarized as "lol, something was undefined. I'm not gonna tell you where, go figure it out chump."</li>
<li>Pattern matching is a neat way to think about working with data. It's possible to get away without it in some instances, but the language pushes you hard towards using it at every opportunity. Having a built-in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language">DSL</a> to describe the possible shapes and quantities of your data makes reasoning about data very visual and near-at-hand compared to other languages.</li>
<li>The line that Elixir draws between explicit and implicit code is very sensible. You need to be explicit about your data when pattern matching. But once you've ascertained that your data is in fact in the quantity and shape that you expected it to be, you can choose to be implicit about the transformations you perform on that data with the pipe operator. This is somewhat akin to the "imperative shell, functional core" idea from a Ruby talk called <a href="https://youtu.be/yTkzNHF6rMs">Boundaries</a> by Gary Bernhardt. Very cool.</li>
</ul>

<p>
I hope you enjoyed reading! Until next time folks.
</p>
</div>
</div>
<script src="/public/js/elixir/prism.js"></script>

